+++
title = "Evidence from the future"
date = "2023-10-08"
publication_types = ["1"]
publication = "_Journal of Experimental Psychology: General_"
abstract = "The outcome of any scientific experiment or intervention will naturally unfold over time. How then should individuals make causal inferences from measurements over time? Across three experiments, we had participants observe experimental and control groups over several days post-treatment in a fictional biological research setting. We identify competing perspectives in the literature: Contingency-driven accounts predict no effect of outcome timing while the contiguity principle suggests people will view a treatment as more harmful to the extent that bad treatment outcomes occur earlier rather than later. In contrast, inference to the functional form of a treatment effect can license extrapolation beyond the measurements and lead to different causal inferences. We find participants’ causal strength and direction judgments in temporal settings vary with minimal manipulations of instruction framing. When it is implied that the observations are made over a pre-planned number of days, causal judgments depend strongly on contiguity. When it is implied that the observation may be ongoing, participants extrapolate current trends into the future and adapt their causal judgments accordingly. Our results demonstrate human flexibility in how temporal evidence is interpreted and emphasize our sensitivity to task framing in our generalizations."
abstract_short = ""
image_preview = ""
selected = true
projects = []
tags = []
url_project = "https://osf.io/h2y3g/"
url_pdf = "https://psyarxiv.com/f67nx/"
math = true
highlight = true
[header]
image = ""
caption = ""
[[authors]]
	name = "Tianwei Gong"
	is_member = true
[[authors]]
	name = "Neil R. Bramley"
	is_member = true
+++
